# ESP32 interface to connect Calypso BLE anemometer (Tested with Solar Portable) to Signalk

This project connects the (Ultrasonic Portable Solar wind meter)[https://calypsoinstruments.com/shop/product/ultrasonic-portable-solar-wind-meter-2?category=1#attr=62] of Calypso Intruments to a SignalK server.

It runs on a ESP32 device because it has WiFi and BLE needed for the connections. Runs on 12v and need no other connection.

At this moment ssid and password of the network are hardwired. Looking for a simple good way to configure them. probably will be from a BLE characteristic.

Configuration of SignalK server is done through MDNS so it is important that in the Server/Settings optiom mdns is on!!!.

The device asks for an acces request token so first time (or after resetting with the button down) it will send a request to the 
server that must be accepted. Other times it will not be necessary.

It writes to the signalK server in paths :

    - environment.wind.angleApparent
    - environment.wind.speedApparent
    - electrical.batteries.99.capacity.stateOfCharge 

For configuring sensor speed use the server sharacteristic sensors.wind.speed with a value of 1, 4 or 8 Hz
For using or not the other sensors use sensors.wind.sensors with a value of 0 or 1

If you don't preten d to modify them best i set them fixed in base values.

The device uses :

    - GPIO 17 as WiFi LED
    - GPIO 16 as BLE LED
    - GPIO 26 as Force MDNS

GPIO 26 is pulled up. Put the switch between GPIO 26 and GND

## Hardware

This project has been tested in an ESP32 MINI D1 just because there was one on the shelf. If using another device check if pins are OK and modify them as necessary at the beginning og main.cpp. Also configure your ssi and password. If you change the name of the wind meter change ULTRASONIC in main.cpp to the name you put. It is used to get it from the advertised data.

You may power the device as you want. I used an LD33V linear regulator and 2 10uF capacitors just because I had them available.

LED's start on when not connected and are off when connections are full (WIfi Connected, Server found and connected and identified correctly, Wind Meter BLE connected and services and characteristics found)

Green LED (GPIO 17) is used for WiFi
Blue LED (GPIO 16) is used for BLE. It blinks once for every data received.


## 01/04/24

Supressed LED's and all information is presented in the onboard blue led. If all goes well it just makes a pulse when sending wind messages.

Changes to Hardware. GPIO 16 and 17 are used as RX and TX for UART2 which is connected to a GPSMAP 540 to PORT 1 with NMEA 0183 protocol at high speed(38400 bps).

Garmin, for undisclosed reasons, uses TTL (5v) signals and they are negative pulse. So there are 2 6N137 optocouplers, onece again because I had them, one receives data from the GPS, inverts it and converts it to 3.3v levels so it is compatible with the ESP. The seconds receive sthe output of GPIO 17, inverts it and pushes it to the GPS at 5 v.

Messages are read from the plotter (Usually GPS related messages in my case) and sent without interpretation to port 10110 of the signal K server which interprets it.

In the same way messages received from port 10110 are sent to the plotter with the exception of those that begin with GP or PG which are generated by GPSMAP 540.

That way we should have access from the plotter to wind, depth and AIS information!!! Good interconnection for an old plotter.

## 14/05/24

Final tests with definitive installation. Anemometer is at the top of a 1 5m mast and the receiver is installed in the wheel pedestal. Signal seems enough even when raining, that does not happen a lot here.

Corrected an error when passing ints to uint in senddata function. It gave strange results. Also now apparent wind direction is sent as +/- PI radians, not 0-360 degrees as reported by the anemometer.

